README.md, before:

<!--Simple and Compound Machines (c) by dillmo-->

Simple and Compound Machines
===========================
This project is meant to serve as an introduction for compound machines, as well
as the simple machines they are composed of. The guide will be focusing
specifically on educating people enough to be prepared for the compound machines
challenge in the *Science Olympiad*. However, people who want to learn the
basics of compound machines can benefit from reading this as well, as it will
give them a general knowledge of the subject.

Readers can expect to be able to read this document from the top down. Topics
will be organized by the level of knowledge required to read learn them. For
instance, you can expect to learn about a lever before you learn of machines
utilizing levers.

Additionally, readers will learn the expectations of the compound machines
portion of the *Science Olympiad*, as well as how the competition will work. All
in all, you can expect to be totally prepared for the competition after reading
this document, provided you study the material.

Table of Contents
-----------------
1. *Science Olympiad* Competition
2. Simple Machines
  1. Levers
  2. Wheel and Axles
  3. Inclined Planes
  4. Wedges
  5. Screws
  6. Pulleys
3. Mechanical Advantage
  1. Mechanical Advantage of Simple Machines
  2. Mechanical Advantage of Compound Machines
4. Joints
  1. Revolute Joints
  2. Sliding Joints
  3. Cam Joints
  4. Gear Joints
5. Putting it All Together
6. Building a Compound Lever
7. History of Compound Machines

*Science Olympiad* Competition
----------------------------
During the *Science Olympiad*, competitors will be tested on their knowledge of
compound machines by being asked questions on them. Additionally, they are
expected to use a compound lever to determine the quantity of an unknown mass.
The former will require studying, whereas the latter requires competitors to
have a good understanding of *mechanical advantage*. Additionally, students
will have to build a compound lever themselves, as their prebuild.

Officially, the event is split into two parts. The first part is the written
test. The test will include questions on basic concepts of compound machines,
as well as calculations and the history of compound machines. For the second
event, competitors are given a known mass and an unknown mass. Using a compound
lever, they are expected to determine the unknown mass. The second portion of
the competition will be graded on accuracy and speed.

Competitors are expected to bring their compound lever, a binder of notes, a
calculator, and other tools or supplies. Materials held in the binder should be
firmly within it. Judges can be expected to turn the binders upside down, to
test if anything falls out. The lever itself must be built of two levers which
are directly connected to each other and a beam of a length not exceeding 50
centimeters.

Simple Machines
---------------
Simple machines are devices that modify normally by amplifying, a force or
change its direction. When working with simple machines, it is important to
recognize that force is a vector quantity. For instance, you do not just have 1
N of force, you have 1 N of force downward. Be sure to take this into account
when doing your math.

Remember that simple machines are what make up compound machines. So, a wheel
could be thought of as a simple machine, but a cart could be thought of as a
compound machine, since it uses wheels in tandem with other machines.

Finally, you should know that simple machines are not motorized. A motor would
be an input force, not the machine itself. All the machine does is provide a
*mechanical advantage*, or factor of amplification, to the input force in order
to produce an output force, possible changing the direction of the force in the
process. Be aware that there are two types of mechanical advantage. First off
is ideal mechanical advantage. This is only applicable if you are in a
frictionless environment, not in the real world. Secondly, you have an actual
mechanical advantage, which does account for wear and tear as well as for
friction. The actual mechanical advantage can be calculated as the ratio of the
input force to the output force.

### Levers
Levers are simple machines generally designed to amplify an input force. A
lever is essentially a beam connected to a hinge. This hinge is called the
*fulcrum*. The ideal mechanical advantage of a lever is the ratio of the
distance from the fulcrum to the point where the force is applied to the lever
(L) to the distance from the fulcrum to the point where force is outputted (F),
or F/L.

On a lever, the output force always comes from the opposite end of the input
force. Generally, the output force will be applied on one end, and the input
applied all the way on the other. If this is true, then F + T will always be
equal to the length of the lever.

### Wheel and Axles
A wheel and axle is a wheel attached to a rod, the axle, in such a way that the
wheel will rotate together with the axle. This machine is generally used to
lift weights. This is achieved by winding rope around the axle and attaching
the weight to the end of the rope. As the wheel rotates, it will lift the
weight up or down. In this form, the wheel and axle is called a *windlass*.

To determine whether something is a wheel and axle, you should look for two
things. First off, you should test to make sure the machine contains two
cylinders. Next, you should make sure they both rotate on the same axis.
Provided both are true, you can be sure the device is a wheel and axle.
Remember that this device must be a physical system. So, the motion of one
cylinder must affect the motion of the other.

The ideal mechanical advantage of a wheel and axle is the radius of the wheel
divided by the radius of the axle. The wheel should be considered to be the
larger cylinder of the system and the axle the smaller one.

### Inclined Planes
Most commonly called ramps, inclined planes are slopes that a weight will be
slid up. More specifically, it can be defined as a surface where one end is
higher than the other. Such devices are normally used for moving a weight
vertically, similar to a windlass.

The ideal mechanical advantage of an inclined plane is equal to the reciprocal
of the sine of the slope angle. If you consider the inclined plane to be a
right triangle, with the hypotenuse as its length and the legs as the ground
and its height off the ground, the slope angle is equal to the angle adjacent
to the ground and the hypotenuse.

### Wedges
At first sight, wedges seem to be inclined planes. They are in fact very
similar in purpose to an inclined plane. Both can be used to lift objects. A
wedge, however, is used for another application. Basically, the task of a wedge
is to separate two surfaces. Unlike with an inclined plane, this does not need
to be done vertically. Additionally, the force comes from the blunt edge of the
wedge, not a pulling force upon the object itself.

Wedges are probably most familiar in two objects. The first is the hatchet,
which has a purpose of separating wood into multiple pieces. Secondly, there is
the door wedge. Here, force under the wedge keeps a door from closing, even
though it is applying force in that direction. In general, a wedge can be
considered a portable inclined plane.

Wedges work by taking a force and making it perpendicular to the direction in
which it is going. To understand this, it is important to recall that forces
are vector quantities. This perpendicular force is generally called by another
name within the realm of physics. This name is *normal force*.

To calculate the ideal mechanical advantage of a wedge, you must simply divide
the length of its slope by its width. Therefore, if your wedge is a right
triangle with the hypotenuse facing upwards, the mechanical advantage would be
the length of its base divided by the length of the hypotenuse.

### Screws
A screw is similar to a motor in principle. Whereas a motor is used to convert
electrical energy to physical force, a screw is used to convert torque to
linear force. All screws utilize the fact that a rotating helix can cause
linear force.

To understand this, you can consider a screw to be an inclined plane wrapped
around a cylinder. This allows you to see the connection between torque and
linear force in application to a helix.

Finding the ideal mechanical advantage of a screw is too complex for this
application, since it requires a strong base in physics. However, you should
know that the mechanical advantage increases as the distance between the
threads increases. Conversely, the mechanical advantage of a screw decreases as
the distance between the threads decreases.

### Pulleys
A pulley is essentially a wheel and axle. However, it is designed to perform a
very different tax. Instead of changing linear motion into torque, a pulley
provides a mechanical advantage to linear motion.

If you look at a pulley, you will recognize a wheel and axle. The will
generally has a groove, in order to support a rope or string. This design makes
it possible for the wheel to not only provide a mechanical advantage to a
force, but to change its direction as well. This can prove very useful in
compound machines, since not only are you supplied with a method to convert
torque into linear motion and vice versa, but you are also supplied with a
method to change the direction of a force, even 180 degrees.

The most recognizable machine utilizing the pulley is a block and tackle, which
threads rope between two pulleys in order to gain a mechanical advantage. The
more times the rope is threaded between the pulleys, the greater the mechanical
advantage of the machine. In the block and tackle, the ideal mechanical
advantage is equal to the number of parts of rope that support the block. This
is best demonstrated by the diagram below, where the gun tackle has an ideal
mechanical advantage of two, and each subsequent machine has a mechanical
advantage one higher than the previous one.

![Block and Tackle Designs](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e1/Tackles.png "Block and Tackles")

"A diagram showing some of the more common ways of rigging a tackle/purchase
with their names," by Welkinridge. Available under a
[Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en)
license.

Commit message:

Provide example images for simple machines

README.md, after:

<!--Simple and Compound Machines (c) by dillmo-->

Simple and Compound Machines
===========================
This project is meant to serve as an introduction for compound machines, as well
as the simple machines they are composed of. The guide will be focusing
specifically on educating people enough to be prepared for the compound machines
challenge in the *Science Olympiad*. However, people who want to learn the
basics of compound machines can benefit from reading this as well, as it will
give them a general knowledge of the subject.

Readers can expect to be able to read this document from the top down. Topics
will be organized by the level of knowledge required to read learn them. For
instance, you can expect to learn about a lever before you learn of machines
utilizing levers.

Additionally, readers will learn the expectations of the compound machines
portion of the *Science Olympiad*, as well as how the competition will work. All
in all, you can expect to be totally prepared for the competition after reading
this document, provided you study the material.

Table of Contents
-----------------
1. *Science Olympiad* Competition
2. Simple Machines
  1. Levers
  2. Wheel and Axles
  3. Inclined Planes
  4. Wedges
  5. Screws
  6. Pulleys
3. Mechanical Advantage
  1. Mechanical Advantage of Simple Machines
  2. Mechanical Advantage of Compound Machines
4. Joints
  1. Revolute Joints
  2. Sliding Joints
  3. Cam Joints
  4. Gear Joints
5. Putting it All Together
6. Building a Compound Lever
7. History of Compound Machines

*Science Olympiad* Competition
----------------------------
During the *Science Olympiad*, competitors will be tested on their knowledge of
compound machines by being asked questions on them. Additionally, they are
expected to use a compound lever to determine the quantity of an unknown mass.
The former will require studying, whereas the latter requires competitors to
have a good understanding of *mechanical advantage*. Additionally, students
will have to build a compound lever themselves, as their prebuild.

Officially, the event is split into two parts. The first part is the written
test. The test will include questions on basic concepts of compound machines,
as well as calculations and the history of compound machines. For the second
event, competitors are given a known mass and an unknown mass. Using a compound
lever, they are expected to determine the unknown mass. The second portion of
the competition will be graded on accuracy and speed.

Competitors are expected to bring their compound lever, a binder of notes, a
calculator, and other tools or supplies. Materials held in the binder should be
firmly within it. Judges can be expected to turn the binders upside down, to
test if anything falls out. The lever itself must be built of two levers which
are directly connected to each other and a beam of a length not exceeding 50
centimeters.

Simple Machines
---------------
Simple machines are devices that modify normally by amplifying, a force or
change its direction. When working with simple machines, it is important to
recognize that force is a vector quantity. For instance, you do not just have 1
N of force, you have 1 N of force downward. Be sure to take this into account
when doing your math.

Remember that simple machines are what make up compound machines. So, a wheel
could be thought of as a simple machine, but a cart could be thought of as a
compound machine, since it uses wheels in tandem with other machines.

Finally, you should know that simple machines are not motorized. A motor would
be an input force, not the machine itself. All the machine does is provide a
*mechanical advantage*, or factor of amplification, to the input force in order
to produce an output force, possible changing the direction of the force in the
process. Be aware that there are two types of mechanical advantage. First off
is ideal mechanical advantage. This is only applicable if you are in a
frictionless environment, not in the real world. Secondly, you have an actual
mechanical advantage, which does account for wear and tear as well as for
friction. The actual mechanical advantage can be calculated as the ratio of the
input force to the output force.

### Levers
Levers are simple machines generally designed to amplify an input force. A
lever is essentially a beam connected to a hinge. This hinge is called the
*fulcrum*. The ideal mechanical advantage of a lever is the ratio of the
distance from the fulcrum to the point where the force is applied to the lever
(L) to the distance from the fulcrum to the point where force is outputted (F),
or F/L. An example of a lever is shown below.

![Lever Forces](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1b/Simple_lever_forces.svg/389px-Simple_lever_forces.svg.png "Lever Forces")

On a lever, the output force always comes from the opposite end of the input
force. Generally, the output force will be applied on one end, and the input
applied all the way on the other. If this is true, then F + T will always be
equal to the length of the lever.

### Wheel and Axles
A wheel and axle is a wheel attached to a rod, the axle, in such a way that the
wheel will rotate together with the axle. This machine is generally used to
lift weights. This is achieved by winding rope around the axle and attaching
the weight to the end of the rope. As the wheel rotates, it will lift the
weight up or down. In this form, the wheel and axle is called a *windlass*. An
example windlass is shown below.

![Windlass](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/46/Wheelaxle_quackenbos.gif "Windlass")

To determine whether something is a wheel and axle, you should look for two
things. First off, you should test to make sure the machine contains two
cylinders. Next, you should make sure they both rotate on the same axis.
Provided both are true, you can be sure the device is a wheel and axle.
Remember that this device must be a physical system. So, the motion of one
cylinder must affect the motion of the other.

The ideal mechanical advantage of a wheel and axle is the radius of the wheel
divided by the radius of the axle. The wheel should be considered to be the
larger cylinder of the system and the axle the smaller one.

### Inclined Planes
Most commonly called ramps, inclined planes are slopes that a weight will be
slid up. More specifically, it can be defined as a surface where one end is
higher than the other. Such devices are normally used for moving a weight
vertically, similar to a windlass. An example of an inclined plane is shown
below.

![Inclined Plane](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ee/Free_body_diagram.png "Inclined Plane")

The ideal mechanical advantage of an inclined plane is equal to the reciprocal
of the sine of the slope angle. If you consider the inclined plane to be a
right triangle, with the hypotenuse as its length and the legs as the ground
and its height off the ground, the slope angle is equal to the angle adjacent
to the ground and the hypotenuse.

### Wedges
At first sight, wedges seem to be inclined planes. They are in fact very
similar in purpose to an inclined plane. Both can be used to lift objects. A
wedge, however, is used for another application. Basically, the task of a wedge
is to separate two surfaces. Unlike with an inclined plane, this does not need
to be done vertically. Additionally, the force comes from the blunt edge of the
wedge, not a pulling force upon the object itself. An example of a wedge is
shown below.

![Wedge](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/58/Klin.jpg "Wedge Forces")

"Wedge," by Ciszewski W. Available under a
[Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en)
license.

Wedges are probably most familiar in two objects. The first is the hatchet,
which has a purpose of separating wood into multiple pieces. Secondly, there is
the door wedge. Here, force under the wedge keeps a door from closing, even
though it is applying force in that direction. In general, a wedge can be
considered a portable inclined plane.

Wedges work by taking a force and making it perpendicular to the direction in
which it is going. To understand this, it is important to recall that forces
are vector quantities. This perpendicular force is generally called by another
name within the realm of physics. This name is *normal force*.

To calculate the ideal mechanical advantage of a wedge, you must simply divide
the length of its slope by its width. Therefore, if your wedge is a right
triangle with the hypotenuse facing upwards, the mechanical advantage would be
the length of its base divided by the length of the hypotenuse.

### Screws
A screw is similar to a motor in principle. Whereas a motor is used to convert
electrical energy to physical force, a screw is used to convert torque to
linear force. All screws utilize the fact that a rotating helix can cause
linear force.

To understand this, you can consider a screw to be an inclined plane wrapped
around a cylinder. This allows you to see the connection between torque and
linear force in application to a helix. An example screw is shown below.

![Screw](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/32/Screw_demonstrator.png "Screw")

Finding the ideal mechanical advantage of a screw is too complex for this
application, since it requires a strong base in physics. However, you should
know that the mechanical advantage increases as the distance between the
threads increases. Conversely, the mechanical advantage of a screw decreases as
the distance between the threads decreases.

### Pulleys
A pulley is essentially a wheel and axle. However, it is designed to perform a
very different tax. Instead of changing linear motion into torque, a pulley
provides a mechanical advantage to linear motion.

If you look at a pulley, you will recognize a wheel and axle. The will
generally has a groove, in order to support a rope or string. This design makes
it possible for the wheel to not only provide a mechanical advantage to a
force, but to change its direction as well. This can prove very useful in
compound machines, since not only are you supplied with a method to convert
torque into linear motion and vice versa, but you are also supplied with a
method to change the direction of a force, even 180 degrees.

The most recognizable machine utilizing the pulley is a block and tackle, which
threads rope between two pulleys in order to gain a mechanical advantage. The
more times the rope is threaded between the pulleys, the greater the mechanical
advantage of the machine. In the block and tackle, the ideal mechanical
advantage is equal to the number of parts of rope that support the block. This
is best demonstrated by the diagram below, where the gun tackle has an ideal
mechanical advantage of two, and each subsequent machine has a mechanical
advantage one higher than the previous one.

![Block and Tackle Designs](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e1/Tackles.png "Block and Tackles")

"A diagram showing some of the more common ways of rigging a tackle/purchase
with their names," by Welkinridge. Available under a
[Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en)
license.
